Docs for BYO external auth (#150)
kgateway-dev/kgateway.dev: content/docs/security/external-auth.md

---
title: External auth
weight: 10
description: Bring your own external authorization service to protect requests that go through your Gateway. 
---

Bring your own external authorization service to protect requests that go through your Gateway. 

## About external auth {#about}

> {{< reuse "docs/snippets/product-name-caps.md" >}} lets you integrate your own external authorization service to your Gateway, based on the [Envoy external authorization filter](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/intro/arch_overview/security/ext_authz_filter). Then, this external authorization service makes authorization decisions for requests that go through the Gateway, as shown in the following diagram.

Author: Envoy calls it authorization ([link](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/intro/arch_overview/security/ext_authz_filter)) I believe because with this extension, from the gateway perspective it is just getting back a yes/no as to whether the request should be authorized...perhaps the ext auth service might enforce authentication in order to make that authorization determination, but that would be something they have to configure in the ext auth service to do. So it's unlike the enterprise GG where you can integrate an external authentication provider.

> {{< reuse "docs/snippets/product-name-caps.md" >}} lets you integrate your own external authorization service to your Gateway, based on the [Envoy external authorization filter](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/intro/arch_overview/security/ext_authz_filter). Then, this external authorization service makes authorization decisions for requests that go through the Gateway, as shown in the following diagram.

Reviewer: ah ok, interesting :)

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant Client
    participant Gateway
    participant Ext Auth Service
    participant Backend

    Client->>Gateway: 1. HTTP Request
    Gateway->>Ext Auth Service: 2. Authorization Request
    Ext Auth Service-->>Gateway: 3. Authorization Decision
    
    alt Authorized
        Gateway->>Backend: 4. Forward Request
        Backend-->>Gateway: Response
        Gateway-->>Client: Response
    else Not Authorized
        Gateway-->>Client: 5. 403 Forbidden
    end
```

1. The Client sends a request to the Gateway.
2. The Gateway forwards the request to the Ext Auth Service.

> 3. The Ext Auth Service makes a decision as to whether the request is authorized, based on headers, parameters, or other credentials.

Reviewer: you have Ext Auth Service here but extauth service in the rest of the guide. not sure if you want to make it consistent?

Author: I did not find any `extauth service`. I tried to go through to make it `Ext Auth` for short in the diagram vs `Ext Auth Service` and then typically write it out as `external authorization`

4. If authorized, the Gateway forwards the request to the Backend app, which then sends back a response to the Client through the Gateway.

> 5. If not authorized, the Gateway rejects the request and by default returns a 403 Forbidden response to the Client.

Reviewer: wouldn't it be 401 for authentication and 403 for unauthorized requests

Author: It is 403 by default

           app.kubernetes.io/name: ext-authz
       spec:
         containers:
         - image: gcr.io/istio-testing/ext-authz:1.25-dev
           name: ext-authz
           ports:
           - containerPort: 9000
   EOF
   ```

2. Create a Service for the Deployment that {{< reuse "docs/snippets/product-name.md" >}} can access.

   ```yaml
   kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
   apiVersion: v1
   kind: Service
   metadata:
     namespace: kgateway-system
     name: ext-authz
     labels:
       app: ext-authz
   spec:
     ports:
     - port: 4444
       targetPort: 9000
       protocol: TCP
       appProtocol: kubernetes.io/h2c
     selector:
       app: ext-authz
   EOF
   ```

3. Create a GatewayExtension resource that points to your external authorization Service.

   ```yaml
   kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
   apiVersion: gateway.kgateway.dev/v1alpha1
   kind: GatewayExtension
   metadata:
     namespace: kgateway-system
     name: basic-extauth
     labels:
       app: ext-authz
   spec:
     type: ExtAuth
     extAuth:
       grpcService:
         backendRef:
           name: ext-authz
           port: 4444   
   EOF
   ```

## Create external auth policy {#create-policy}

> You can apply policy at two levels: the Gateway level or the HTTPRoute level. If you apply policy at both levels, the request must pass both policies to be authorized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can apply a policy at two levels: the Gateway level or the HTTPRoute level. If you apply policy at both levels, the request must pass both policies to be authorized.
```

> 1. Send a test request to the httpbin sample app to verify that you do not need authorization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Send a test request to the httpbin sample app.  Verify that you get back a 200 HTTP response code and that no authorization is required. 
```
